What does the term "the West" refer to?;Culturally, it refers to free and participatory political institutions, capitalist economies, religious toleration, rational inquiry, and an innovative spirit. (Lecture 1: “Western,” “Civilization,” and “Foundations”)
What is civilization?;It is a complex term that refers to the development of cities, social cohesion, cooperation, specialization of labor, and the emergence of arts and crafts. (Lecture 1: “Western,” “Civilization,” and “Foundations”)
What are the three Abrahamic faiths?;Judaism, Christianity, and Islam. (Lecture 1: “Western,” “Civilization,” and “Foundations”)
What major features of modernity had come into view by A.D. 1600?;The Renaissance and the Reformation, the division of Christendom into Catholic and Protestant communities, the modern state system, and the Scientific Revolution. (Lecture 1: “Western,” “Civilization,” and “Foundations”)
What book is mentioned as a suggested reading?;Braudel, History of Civilizations. (Lecture 1: “Western,” “Civilization,” and “Foundations”)
What were the kings in Mesopotamia thought to be?;Put in place by the gods to rule with special favor. (Lecture 2: History Begins at Sumer)
Where did the earliest traces of civilization appear in Mesopotamia?;Sumer, in what is now southern Iraq. (Lecture 2: History Begins at Sumer)
What was invented during the Uruk period?;The wheel and plow. (Lecture 2: History Begins at Sumer)
What were the most impressive early buildings in Mesopotamia?;Temples called ziggurats. (Lecture 2: History Begins at Sumer)
Who emerged as local strongmen in Mesopotamia during the Dynastic period?;Lugals. (Lecture 2: History Begins at Sumer)
What is the name of the conqueror who ruled Sumer and expanded his empire?;Sargon. (Lecture 2: History Begins at Sumer)
Who was the most famous and powerful of the Babylonians?;Hammurabi. (Lecture 2: History Begins at Sumer)
What was the religion of the people in Mesopotamia?;Polytheism. (Lecture 2: History Begins at Sumer)
What was the important principle established by the Mesopotamian laws?;All are subject to the law. (Lecture 2: History Begins at Sumer)
What was the Epic of Gilgamesh?;A Sumerian work dating to around 2500 B.C. (Lecture 2: History Begins at Sumer)
Explain the impact of geography on the course of Egyptian history.;The Nile River provided fertile land for agriculture and transportation, which allowed for the development of a prosperous civilization. (Lecture 3: Egypt—The Gift of the Nile)
How is Egyptian historical development both like and unlike that of Mesopotamia?;Both civilizations developed around major rivers and relied on agriculture, but Egypt had a more stable and centralized government compared to the city-states of Mesopotamia. (Lecture 3: Egypt—The Gift of the Nile)
What did the Phoenicians create?;One of the first great commercial empires (Lecture 4: The Hebrews—Small States and Big Ideas)
Who attacked along the eastern shore of the Mediterranean?;The Sea peoples, most famously the Philistines (Lecture 4: The Hebrews—Small States and Big Ideas)
Where were the Phoenicians located?;Coastal Syria and Lebanon (Lecture 4: The Hebrews—Small States and Big Ideas)
What were the Hebrews known for?;Their religious and ethical ideas (Lecture 4: The Hebrews—Small States and Big Ideas)
Who led the Hebrews during the Exodus?;Moses (Lecture 4: The Hebrews—Small States and Big Ideas)
What led to the division of the Hebrew kingdom?;A distaste for strong central authority (Lecture 4: The Hebrews—Small States and Big Ideas)
What happened to Israel and Judah?;They were conquered by more powerful neighbors (Lecture 4: The Hebrews—Small States and Big Ideas)
What is the name of the collection of writings that make up the Hebrew Bible?;The Torah (Lecture 4: The Hebrews—Small States and Big Ideas)
What are the three major kinds of materials in the Hebrew Bible?;The Torah, the Prophets, and the Writings (Lecture 4: The Hebrews—Small States and Big Ideas)
What are the three central religious ideas contained in the Hebrew Bible?;The idea of the covenant, the idea of exclusive monotheism, and the idea of ethical monotheism (Lecture 4: The Hebrews—Small States and Big Ideas)
What was the main achievement of the Neo-Babylonians?;The massive rebuilding of the city of Babylon. (Lecture 5: A Succession of Empires)
What were the Assyrians known for?;Their huge army, iron weapons, and cavalry. (Lecture 5: A Succession of Empires)
What group challenged the Assyrians and became their main rivals?;The Neo-Babylonians. (Lecture 5: A Succession of Empires)
What was the historical achievement of the Lydians?;The invention of coinage. (Lecture 5: A Succession of Empires)
Who were the major players in the anti-Assyrian coalition?;The Medes and Persians. (Lecture 5: A Succession of Empires)
What was the chief manifestation of Persian culture?;The religion Zoroastrianism. (Lecture 5: A Succession of Empires)
Who was the creator god in Zoroastrianism?;Ahura Mazda. (Lecture 5: A Succession of Empires)
What did Zarathustra teach about good and evil?;They played out a great cosmic challenge and human beings had free will to choose one path or the other. (Lecture 5: A Succession of Empires)
What legacy did the Persians leave behind?;Civilized rule, ideas about kingship and government, and a profound religious heritage. (Lecture 5: A Succession of Empires)
What is the name of the island where civilization in the Greek world began?;Crete (Lecture 6: Wide-Ruling Agamemnon)
What is the name of the massive palace complex that provides clues about the Minoans?;Knossos (Lecture 6: Wide-Ruling Agamemnon)
When did Minoan civilization flourish?;1800 to 1550 B.C. (Lecture 6: Wide-Ruling Agamemnon)
What is the name of the great citadel at Mycenae?;Mycenae (Lecture 6: Wide-Ruling Agamemnon)
What are the three sources of our knowledge of the Myceneans?;Linear B documents, archaeology, Homeric poems (Lecture 6: Wide-Ruling Agamemnon)
What is the period of time traditionally called the Dark Ages in Greece?;Between 1200 and 1100 B.C. (Lecture 7: Dark Age and Archaic Greece)
What were the four major groupings of Greeks with modest ethnic and linguistic differences?;Attic, Ionic, Aeolic, and Doric. (Lecture 7: Dark Age and Archaic Greece)
What was the key Greek political institution during the Archaic period?;The polis (city-state). (Lecture 7: Dark Age and Archaic Greece)
What were the three responses of Greek cities to the tensions of the age?;Conquest, trade, and colonization. (Lecture 7: Dark Age and Archaic Greece)
Where did the Greeks get their alphabet from?;The Phoenicians. (Lecture 7: Dark Age and Archaic Greece)
What are some aspects of Greek culture that emerged during the later Dark Ages and the Archaic period?;Pottery decorations, sculpture, and exploration of the human condition. (Lecture 7: Dark Age and Archaic Greece)
What form of warfare is depicted in Homer's poems?;From the single combat of the heroes to the hoplite phalanx featuring the ordinary soldier. (Lecture 7: Dark Age and Archaic Greece)
What is the formula for expressing the physical characteristics of a polis?;asty + chora = polis (Lecture 8: The Greek Polis—Sparta)
What does asty mean?;city proper (Lecture 8: The Greek Polis—Sparta)
What does chora mean?;region or district (Lecture 8: The Greek Polis—Sparta)
What were the social classes in Sparta?;homoioi, periokoi, helots (Lecture 8: The Greek Polis—Sparta)
How many kings were there in Sparta?;two (Lecture 8: The Greek Polis—Sparta)
What was the role of the ephors in Sparta?;to ensure that laws and verdicts were in accordance with Spartan tradition (Lecture 8: The Greek Polis—Sparta)
What was the purpose of the agoge in Spartan society?;military training and discipline (Lecture 8: The Greek Polis—Sparta)
What was the main function of marriage in Sparta?;to produce more equals (Lecture 8: The Greek Polis—Sparta)
What league did Sparta form?;the Peloponnesian League (Lecture 8: The Greek Polis—Sparta)
What were some characteristics admired by contemporaries of Sparta?;strength, simplicity, stability (Lecture 8: The Greek Polis—Sparta)
What was the gradual shift of political power in Athens?;From the eupatrids to the demos. (Lecture 9: The Greek Polis—Athens)
Who codified the laws of Athens?;Draco. (Lecture 9: The Greek Polis—Athens)
Who was appointed lawgiver in Athens?;Solon. (Lecture 9: The Greek Polis—Athens)
Who elevated Peisistratus to a mild tyranny in Athens?;The lowest classes. (Lecture 9: The Greek Polis—Athens)
Who was given powers to make reforms in Athens?;Cleisthenes. (Lecture 9: The Greek Polis—Athens)
Who ended all aristocratic privilege in Athens?;Ephialtes and Pericles. (Lecture 9: The Greek Polis—Athens)
For whom did the Athenian democracy work?;Athenian citizens. (Lecture 9: The Greek Polis—Athens)
How was the Athenian democracy financed?;By tribute from the Athenian Empire and slave labor. (Lecture 9: The Greek Polis—Athens)
Who defended the Athenian democracy in his "Funeral Oration"?;Pericles. (Lecture 9: The Greek Polis—Athens)
Who criticized the Athenian democracy?;Almost all ancient writers. (Lecture 9: The Greek Polis—Athens)
What was the verdict on the Athenian democracy?;The Athenians demonstrated what a democracy might be. (Lecture 9: The Greek Polis—Athens)
What art forms are considered the most public and communal in Athens?;Architecture and drama. (Lecture 10: Civic Culture—Architecture and Drama)
When did Greeks stop building palaces and start focusing on civic architecture?;In the Dark Ages and Archaic period. (Lecture 10: Civic Culture—Architecture and Drama)
Who initiated a building program in Athens?;Peisistratus. (Lecture 10: Civic Culture—Architecture and Drama)
When was the Parthenon built?;Between 447/446 and 438 B.C. (Lecture 10: Civic Culture—Architecture and Drama)
Who were the chief architects of the Parthenon?;Ictinus and Callicrates. (Lecture 10: Civic Culture—Architecture and Drama)
What are the key elements of a Greek building's floor plan?;Stylobate with colonnade or peristyle, interior chambers, passageways. (Lecture 10: Civic Culture—Architecture and Drama)
What are the key vertical elements of a Greek building?;Stereobate and stylobate, column (shaft and capital), entablature (architrave and metope). (Lecture 10: Civic Culture—Architecture and Drama)
What are the three great sculptural programs of the Parthenon?;Pediments, metopes, and the continuous frieze around the cella. (Lecture 10: Civic Culture—Architecture and Drama)
What was the purpose of the Parthenon's immense size and cost?;To impress and make Athenians proud, and to make them accept the empire. (Lecture 10: Civic Culture—Architecture and Drama)
What does the word tragedy mean?;Goat song. (Lecture 10: Civic Culture—Architecture and Drama)
Who is considered the oldest surviving playwright?;Aesch (Lecture 10: Civic Culture—Architecture and Drama)
What did Voltaire say history was?;Lies the living told about the dead. (Lecture 11: The Birth of History)
Who is considered the "father of history"?;Herodotus. (Lecture 11: The Birth of History)
What were the Persian Wars seen as by Herodotus?;The watershed moment in Greek history. (Lecture 11: The Birth of History)
Who wrote about the Peloponnesian Wars?;Thucydides. (Lecture 11: The Birth of History)
What literary form did the Greeks invent?;History. (Lecture 11: The Birth of History)
What is philosophy?;A form of intellectual discipline. (Lecture 12: From Greek Religion to Socratic Philosophy)
When did philosophy appear?;Around 400 B.C. (Lecture 12: From Greek Religion to Socratic Philosophy)
Who is considered the first philosopher?;Thales of Miletus. (Lecture 12: From Greek Religion to Socratic Philosophy)
What are the three questions at the base of Greek philosophy?;What is the world made of? How can we know? What should we do? (Lecture 12: From Greek Religion to Socratic Philosophy)
Who believed that change was illusory?;Parmenides. (Lecture 12: From Greek Religion to Socratic Philosophy)
What did Pythagoras believe wisdom came from?;A life dedicated to intense thought. (Lecture 12: From Greek Religion to Socratic Philosophy)
What did the Sophists specialize in?;The artful use of language. (Lecture 12: From Greek Religion to Socratic Philosophy)
What distinction did the Sophists make between?;Nomos (law, convention) and physis (nature, the natural order of things). (Lecture 12: From Greek Religion to Socratic Philosophy)
Who said "Man is the measure of all things"?;Protagoras. (Lecture 12: From Greek Religion to Socratic Philosophy)
What is the starting point of Plato's thought?;That there is something "out there" that we can know. (Lecture 13: Plato and Aristotle)
What is Plato's definition of knowledge?;True knowledge is the knowledge of the form, which is the very thing to which the name is applied. (Lecture 13: Plato and Aristotle)
What are the three parts of the soul according to Plato?;Appetites, courage, and reason. (Lecture 13: Plato and Aristotle)
What is the goal of life according to Aristotle?;To be happy, which he equated with virtue. (Lecture 13: Plato and Aristotle)
What are the four causes at work in nature according to Aristotle?;Material, formal, efficient, and final causes. (Lecture 13: Plato and Aristotle)
What was the period after the Peloponnesian War known as?;The 4th century B.C. (Lecture 14: The Failure of the Polis and the Rise of Alexander)
Who eventually conquered the Greek world?;The Macedonians (Lecture 14: The Failure of the Polis and the Rise of Alexander)
What were the difficulties faced by the Greek world in the 4th century B.C.?;Quarrels over strategy, Greek cities medizing, brutality, and battles during the Peloponnesian War (Lecture 14: The Failure of the Polis and the Rise of Alexander)
Who dominated the Greek world for a generation?;The Spartans, aided by Persia (Lecture 14: The Failure of the Polis and the Rise of Alexander)
Who established a hegemony after the Spartans?;The Thebans (Lecture 14: The Failure of the Polis and the Rise of Alexander)
What did the Macedonians call the Greeks?;Barbarians (Lecture 14: The Failure of the Polis and the Rise of Alexander)
Who was the accomplished ruler of Macedon?;Philip II (Lecture 14: The Failure of the Polis and the Rise of Alexander)
Who was hired by Philip II to tutor his son?;Aristotle (Lecture 14: The Failure of the Polis and the Rise of Alexander)
What did Aristotle call man?;A "political animal" (Lecture 14: The Failure of the Polis and the Rise of Alexander)
Who gave rise to Panhellenism?;Isocrates (Lecture 14: The Failure of the Polis and the Rise of Alexander)
Who raised his voice in defense of the autonomy of the polis?;Demosthenes (Lecture 14: The Failure of the Polis and the Rise of Alexander)
Who won the decisive victory over the Greeks at Chaeronea in 338?;Philip's army, led by his son Alexander (Lecture 14: The Failure of the Polis and the Rise of Alexander)
Who became king after Philip's death?;Alexander (Lecture 14: The Failure of the Polis and the Rise of Alexander)
How far did Alexander march with his army?;Into central Asia (Lecture 14: The Failure of the Polis and the Rise of Alexander)
What is the Hellenistic World?;The period from the death of Alexander to the Roman triumph in the Mediterranean. (Lecture 15: The Hellenistic World)
Who carved up Alexander's vast realm after his death?;His leading generals. (Lecture 15: The Hellenistic World)
Which kingdoms fell to the Seleucids?;Syria, Palestine, northern Mesopotamia, and southern Anatolia. (Lecture 15: The Hellenistic World)
What important scientific breakthroughs were made in the Hellenistic world?;Formulation of geometry rules, creation of gadgets and experimental science, formulation of the heliocentric theory, calculation of the circumference of the Earth, and systematization of astronomical information. (Lecture 15: The Hellenistic World)
Who wrote "Argonautica"?;Apollonius. (Lecture 15: The Hellenistic World)
Who was the greatest writer of "new comedy"?;Menander. (Lecture 15: The Hellenistic World)
What were the two major philosophies that arose in the Hellenistic world?;Stoicism and Epicureanism. (Lecture 15: The Hellenistic World)
What was the aim of philosophy according to Epicureans?;Happiness or pleasure. (Lecture 15: The Hellenistic World)
What did Stoicism believe about pain and distress in life?;They are not absolute, final evils and can be overcome by apathy. (Lecture 15: The Hellenistic World)
What impact did Roman imperialism have on Hellenistic culture?;It locked Hellenistic culture into place and deeply influenced the cultures that followed the Romans. (Lecture 15: The Hellenistic World)
What is the area where the Romans emerged called?;Latium (Lecture 16: The Rise of Rome)
What did the Romans create that has been admired and emulated for centuries?;Stable, efficient political institutions (Lecture 16: The Rise of Rome)
What is the most influential secular legal system in the history of the world?;Roman law (Lecture 16: The Rise of Rome)
What were the Romans masters of?;Civil engineering (Lecture 16: The Rise of Rome)
Where did the Romans emerge in the Italian peninsula?;The plain of Latium (Lecture 16: The Rise of Rome)
What is the region north of Latium called?;Liguria-Tuscany (Lecture 16: The Rise of Rome)
Who lived in Campania?;The Samnites (Lecture 16: The Rise of Rome)
What was the area in the south called?;Magna Graecia (Lecture 16: The Rise of Rome)
When did the Iron Age come to central Italy?;Circa 1000 B.C. (Lecture 16: The Rise of Rome)
When was Rome founded according to Roman tradition?;753 B.C. (Lecture 16: The Rise of Rome)
Who ruled Rome before the creation of the republic?;The Etruscans (Lecture 16: The Rise of Rome)
What were the men who assisted the kings called?;Fathers (Patres) (Lecture 16: The Rise of Rome)
What is the Roman assembly of all citizens called?;The Senate (Lecture 16: The Rise of Rome)
What were ordinary people called?;Plebeians (Lecture 16: The Rise of Rome)
What were the two basic changes crucial to the creation of the Roman Republic?;Liberty and republic (Lecture 16: The Rise of Rome)
What did the plebeians want in the early (Lecture 16: The Rise of Rome)
What was the highest magistrate in the Roman Republic?;The consul. (Lecture 17: The Roman Republic—Government and Politics)
How many consuls were elected annually in the Roman Republic?;Two. (Lecture 17: The Roman Republic—Government and Politics)
What were the judicial officers in the Roman Republic called?;Praetors. (Lecture 17: The Roman Republic—Government and Politics)
What was the primary responsibility of the quaestors in the Roman Republic?;Financial officers of the state. (Lecture 17: The Roman Republic—Government and Politics)
How many tribunes were elected from the plebs in the Roman Republic?;Ten. (Lecture 17: The Roman Republic—Government and Politics)
What was the role of the censors in the Roman Republic?;To set the census status of every citizen and legislate on public morality. (Lecture 17: The Roman Republic—Government and Politics)
What were the two main assemblies in the Roman Republic?;The Tribal Assembly and the Centuriate Assembly. (Lecture 17: The Roman Republic—Government and Politics)
How were bills voted on in the Roman assemblies?;Through block voting. (Lecture 17: The Roman Republic—Government and Politics)
Who spoke and voted first in the Roman assemblies?;Seniors. (Lecture 17: The Roman Republic—Government and Politics)
What were some key social values in the Roman Republic?;Auctoritas and mos maiorum. (Lecture 17: The Roman Republic—Government and Politics)
Who wrote a history of Rome's system and evaluated it?;Polybius. (Lecture 17: The Roman Republic—Government and Politics)
What were the three forms of government that Polybius compared the Roman Republic to?;Monarchy, oligarchy, and democracy. (Lecture 17: The Roman Republic—Government and Politics)
Was the Roman system stable for a long time, according to Polybius?;Yes. (Lecture 17: The Roman Republic—Government and Politics)
What were some potential strains on the (Lecture 17: The Roman Republic—Government and Politics)
What does the term "Roman Empire" refer to?;A particular kind of political regime. (Lecture 18: Roman Imperialism)
What is the difference between the term "Roman Empire" and the empire in a geographical sense?;The term "Roman Empire" refers to the political regime, while the empire in a geographical sense refers to the physical expansion of Rome. (Lecture 18: Roman Imperialism)
What was the Latin League?;An alliance forged by Rome in Latium. (Lecture 18: Roman Imperialism)
What were the key principles of Roman diplomacy?;1) Just war, 2) Generosity toward the conquered, 3) Divide and rule, and 4) Tenacity. (Lecture 18: Roman Imperialism)
What were the Punic Wars?;Wars fought between Rome and Carthage. (Lecture 18: Roman Imperialism)
Who was the general that crossed the Alps with elephants during the Second Punic War?;Hannibal. (Lecture 18: Roman Imperialism)
What role did Rome's Italian allies play in the Second Punic War?;They did not fall away and remained loyal to Rome. (Lecture 18: Roman Imperialism)
What territories did Rome annex after the First Punic War?;Sicily, Sardinia, and Corsica. (Lecture 18: Roman Imperialism)
What were the consequences of empire for Rome?;Adapting city-state institutions, opportunities for wealth and prestige, and a corrosive effect on society. (Lecture 18: Roman Imperialism)
What is the head of an aristocratic Roman household called?;Paterfamilias (Lecture 19: The Culture of the Roman Republic)
Who wrote a book on The Old Age of Cato the Elder?;Cicero (Lecture 19: The Culture of the Roman Republic)
What did Cato the Elder write for his son?;Origines (Lecture 19: The Culture of the Roman Republic)
Who introduced Greek philosophy to Rome?;Carneades (Lecture 19: The Culture of the Roman Republic)
Who brought the Greek "new comedy" of Menander to Rome?;Plautus (Lecture 19: The Culture of the Roman Republic)
Which Roman poet emulated Greek poets and treated themes of love?;Catullus (Lecture 19: The Culture of the Roman Republic)
Who was considered the most proli¿c, profound, and synthetic republican writer?;Marcus Tullius Cicero (Lecture 19: The Culture of the Roman Republic)
What qualities did Virgil's character Aeneas embody?;Loyalty, seriousness, perseverance, and devotion to higher causes (Lecture 19: The Culture of the Roman Republic)
What is the topic of Lecture 20?;Rome—From Republic to Empire (Lecture 20: Rome—From Republic to Empire)
What did some old conservatives in Roman politics think about the empire?;They thought it was costing too much in terms of domestic order. (Lecture 20: Rome—From Republic to Empire)
What happened to the Roman Republic?;It turned into the Roman Empire. (Lecture 20: Rome—From Republic to Empire)
Who were the brothers Tiberius and Gaius Gracchus?;Progressive leaders who wanted to accept a legacy and use the money for land redistribution. (Lecture 20: Rome—From Republic to Empire)
What happened to Tiberius Gracchus?;He was murdered. (Lecture 20: Rome—From Republic to Empire)
Who was Marius and what did he do?;He was a "New Man" elected consul, took over the Numidian campaign, and professionalized the Roman army. (Lecture 20: Rome—From Republic to Empire)
Who were Pompey and Julius Caesar?;They were Roman leaders who gained control of an army and became part of the First Triumvirate. (Lecture 20: Rome—From Republic to Empire)
What happened to Caesar in 44 B.C.?;He was murdered by a group of disgruntled senators. (Lecture 20: Rome—From Republic to Empire)
Who were the members of the Second Triumvirate?;Marcus Antonius, Octavian, and Lepidus. (Lecture 20: Rome—From Republic to Empire)
What challenges did the Roman Republic face?;Disruptions in the countryside, erosion of traditional values, and the influence of Greek culture. (Lecture 20: Rome—From Republic to Empire)
What is the period from Augustus to Marcus Aurelius referred to as?;The Pax Romana (Lecture 21: The Pax Romana)
Who controlled Rome's armies during the Pax Romana?;Octavian (Lecture 21: The Pax Romana)
What title did Octavian commonly go by?;Augustus (Lecture 21: The Pax Romana)
Who succeeded Augustus as emperor?;Tiberius (Lecture 21: The Pax Romana)
Which family ruled Rome from 14 to 68?;The Julio-Claudian family (Lecture 21: The Pax Romana)
Who were the "Five Good Emperors"?;Nerva, Trajan, Hadrian, Antoninus Pius, and Marcus Aurelius (Lecture 21: The Pax Romana)
What territory did the Roman Empire reach its greatest extent under Trajan?;Dacia (Lecture 21: The Pax Romana)
What did Tacitus say about the Pax Romana?;The "Romans have made a great desert and called it peace" (Lecture 21: The Pax Romana)
What was the unspoken secret of the principate?;The army could make and unmake the emperor (Lecture 21: The Pax Romana)
What were some benefits of the Pax Romana?;Promoted trade, allowed agriculture to flourish, and provided peace and stability (Lecture 21: The Pax Romana)
What is often referred to as the "Golden Age" of Rome?;The reign of Augustus. (Lecture 22: Rome’s Golden and Silver Ages)
What were the conditions that contributed to a high level of cultural achievement during the reign of Augustus?;Peace and security, wealth and patronage, and a climate of reflection on Rome's past and character. (Lecture 22: Rome’s Golden and Silver Ages)
Who was the greatest poet of the "Golden Age" of Rome?;Virgil. (Lecture 22: Rome’s Golden and Silver Ages)
What is the theme of Virgil's epic poem, the Aeneid?;The somber dignity of Rome's past. (Lecture 22: Rome’s Golden and Silver Ages)
Who is considered the most elegant Roman poet of the "Golden Age"?;Horace. (Lecture 22: Rome’s Golden and Silver Ages)
Who wrote the great History of Livy?;Livy. (Lecture 22: Rome’s Golden and Silver Ages)
Who were the three notable historians of the "Silver Age" of Rome?;Tacitus, Suetonius, and Lucan. (Lecture 22: Rome’s Golden and Silver Ages)
Who was the most significant Stoic writer of this period?;Seneca. (Lecture 22: Rome’s Golden and Silver Ages)
Who wrote the standard manual of the rhetorical art in Rome?;Quintilian. (Lecture 22: Rome’s Golden and Silver Ages)
Who were the three notable Roman satirists of this period?;Lucian, Juvenal, and Martial. (Lecture 22: Rome’s Golden and Silver Ages)
What were some notable architectural achievements during this period?;The Pont du Gard, Hadrian's Wall, the Pantheon, and the Colosseum. (Lecture 22: Rome’s Golden and Silver Ages)
What is the post-apostolic age?;The period after the apostles in Christianity. (Lecture 23: Jesus and the New Testament)
Who were the apologists?;Christian writers who explained their faith to the ancient world. (Lecture 23: Jesus and the New Testament)
What was the most momentous development of the Pax Romana?;The emergence of a new religious faith that swept the Roman world. (Lecture 23: Jesus and the New Testament)
What were the characteristics of the Roman world's cults?;They were not casual and were deeply integrated into public life. (Lecture 23: Jesus and the New Testament)
What are the oldest written materials about Jesus?;The Pauline and Catholic Epistles. (Lecture 23: Jesus and the New Testament)
When were the Gospels written?;Between the 60s and the 80s, possibly even the early 90s. (Lecture 23: Jesus and the New Testament)
What is the "synoptic problem"?;The literary relationship among the Gospels of Matthew, Mark, and Luke. (Lecture 23: Jesus and the New Testament)
What is the two document hypothesis?;The idea that Mark and "Q" serve as sources for Matthew and Luke. (Lecture 23: Jesus and the New Testament)
Where was Jesus born?;Bethlehem. (Lecture 23: Jesus and the New Testament)
Where did Jesus grow up?;Nazareth. (Lecture 23: Jesus and the New Testament)
Where was Jesus baptized?;The Jordan River. (Lecture 23: Jesus and the New Testament)
Where did Jesus go after his baptism?;He began to preach publicly throughout Galilee. (Lecture 23: Jesus and the New Testament)
Where did Jesus go after preaching in Galilee?;Jerusalem. (Lecture 23: Jesus and the New Testament)
What happened to Jesus in Jerusalem?;He was publicly executed. (Lecture 23: Jesus and the New Testament)
 What sort of movement did Jesus think he was founding?;Unclear, history can only provide some clues. (Lecture 24: The Emergence of a Christian Church)
What does the word "church" refer to in Matthew's Gospel?;An institution that emerged because of the teachings of Jesus. (Lecture 24: The Emergence of a Christian Church)
How many disciples met to choose a successor to Judas?;About 120. (Lecture 24: The Emergence of a Christian Church)
Who was the greatest missionary and teacher of the early Christian faith?;Paul. (Lecture 24: The Emergence of a Christian Church)
What were the officials in individual Christian communities called?;Overseers, elders, and servants. (Lecture 24: The Emergence of a Christian Church)
What were deacons in the early Christian church?;People who facilitated the work of the leaders and served the community. (Lecture 24: The Emergence of a Christian Church)
Who wrote A Dialogue with Trypho the Jew to differentiate between Christianity and Judaism?;Justin Martyr. (Lecture 24: The Emergence of a Christian Church)
Who wrote a series of letters to other Christian communities affirming basic doctrines?;Bishop Ignatius of Antioch. (Lecture 24: The Emergence of a Christian Church)
What primarily accounted for the success and spread of Christianity?;Compelling teachings, admirable lives of Christians, heroism of martyrs, compatibility with classical culture. (Lecture 24: The Emergence of a Christian Church)
What does the term "late antiquity" refer to?;The period from about 300 to about 700. (Lecture 25: Late Antiquity—Crisis and Response)
Who is often credited with the idea that the Roman Empire fell?;Edward Gibbon. (Lecture 25: Late Antiquity—Crisis and Response)
What did Gibbon attribute Rome's fall to?;Internal and external reasons, including immoderate greatness, barbarism, and superstition. (Lecture 25: Late Antiquity—Crisis and Response)
What do specialists in "late antiquity" believe about the period?;They believe in a view of transformation, continuity, and change working in tandem. (Lecture 25: Late Antiquity—Crisis and Response)
What was the "crisis of the 3rd century"?;A period of civil wars, usurpations, and violent transfers of power in the Roman Empire. (Lecture 25: Late Antiquity—Crisis and Response)
Who were the two rulers that addressed the problems of the 3rd century?;Diocletian and Constantine. (Lecture 25: Late Antiquity—Crisis and Response)
What did Diocletian introduce to address the problems of the empire?;The tetrarchy, or "rule by four." (Lecture 25: Late Antiquity—Crisis and Response)
How did Diocletian reorganize the provincial administration of the empire?;By creating larger provinces and increasing the size of the imperial administration. (Lecture 25: Late Antiquity—Crisis and Response)
What did Diocletian do to control inflation?;He froze prices, wages, and occupations. (Lecture 25: Late Antiquity—Crisis and Response)
What did Constantine do to address the military challenges of the empire?;He extended (Lecture 25: Late Antiquity—Crisis and Response)
What is a barbarian according to the Romans?;Those who lived outside the Roman Empire. (Lecture 26: Barbarians and Emperors)
Were the barbarian invasions a coordinated event?;No, there were many individual incidents. (Lecture 26: Barbarians and Emperors)
What kind of peoples were the barbarians primarily?;Germanic peoples who spoke Germanic languages. (Lecture 26: Barbarians and Emperors)
When did the Visigoths formally request permission to enter the Roman Empire?;In the 370s. (Lecture 26: Barbarians and Emperors)
What was the result of the Battle of Adrianople in 378?;The Goths defeated the Roman army. (Lecture 26: Barbarians and Emperors)
What did the Visigoths request after Theodosius's death in 395?;A generous landed settlement and a Roman military command for their king. (Lecture 26: Barbarians and Emperors)
What happened in 410 when the Visigoths entered Italy?;They sacked the city of Rome. (Lecture 26: Barbarians and Emperors)
Where did the Visigoths settle after leaving Italy?;Around Toulouse in southern Gaul. (Lecture 26: Barbarians and Emperors)
What role did the Huns play in Gaul?;The Roman military commander used them as mercenaries against the Burgundians. (Lecture 26: Barbarians and Emperors)
When was Romulus Augustulus deposed?;In 476. (Lecture 26: Barbarians and Emperors)
What happened to the former western provinces of the Roman Empire by 500?;They changed into several kingdoms. (Lecture 26: Barbarians and Emperors)
How did the organizational structure of the Catholic Church differ from pagan cults?;Pagan cults did not have an organizational structure like the Catholic Church. (Lecture 27: The Emergence of the Catholic Church)
What were the key factors in the emergence of the bishops of Rome as leaders of the Catholic Church?;The bishops of Rome were considered doubly apostolic with Peter and Paul, and they had historical associations with Rome. (Lecture 27: The Emergence of the Catholic Church)
What were the key steps in the development of the Catholic Church's institution?;The key steps were the emergence of bishops throughout the empire, the rise of the bishops of Rome as leaders, and the influence of the Emperor Theodosius. (Lecture 27: The Emergence of the Catholic Church)
What was the significance of the Council of Nicaea in 325?;The Council of Nicaea condemned the teachings of Arius and affirmed the doctrine of the Trinity in the Nicene Creed. (Lecture 27: The Emergence of the Catholic Church)
What controversies arose in the late 4th and early 5th centuries regarding Jesus Christ?;The controversies centered around the divine and human natures of Jesus Christ. (Lecture 27: The Emergence of the Catholic Church)
What were the achievements of Christianity by the end of the 5th century?;Christianity had an empire-wide organization, a legal status, authoritative writings, and defined doctrines. (Lecture 27: The Emergence of the Catholic Church)
What is the period known as the "patristic" era?;From legalizing of Christianity until about 600 in the West and 750 in the East. (Lecture 28: Christian Culture in Late Antiquity)
Who was the first great Latin father?;Ambrose. (Lecture 28: Christian Culture in Late Antiquity)
Who translated Greek philosophical ideas and the writings of Greek Christian writers into intelligible form for Latins?;Ambrose. (Lecture 28: Christian Culture in Late Antiquity)
Who wrote numerous letters to explain Christian teachings and played a key role in opening up Christian doctrine for high-born Roman women?;Jerome. (Lecture 28: Christian Culture in Late Antiquity)
Who was the greatest of the Latin fathers and wrote "Confessions" and "City of God"?;Augustine. (Lecture 28: Christian Culture in Late Antiquity)
Who were the "Cappadocian fathers" and what were they known for?;Basil the Great, Gregory of Nyssa, and Gregory of Nazianzus. They were formidable biblical scholars and spiritual writers, and participated in the Trinitarian and Christological struggles of the age. (Lecture 28: Christian Culture in Late Antiquity)
Who was patriarch of Constantinople and a preacher of great skill and power?;John Chrysostom. (Lecture 28: Christian Culture in Late Antiquity)
Who were the monks and what did they believe in?;Those who opted out of civic society and believed in rigorous self-denial and discipline for virtual union with God. (Lecture 28: Christian Culture in Late Antiquity)
Who established the eremitic ideal and who established the cenobitic life?; (Lecture 28: Christian Culture in Late Antiquity)
Who came from an old, wealthy, and well-connected Meccan family?;Muhammad (Lecture 29: Muhammad and Islam)
Where did Muhammad receive a revelation from Allah?;In the hills and caves outside Mecca (Lecture 29: Muhammad and Islam)
What are the basic teachings of Muhammad contained in?;The Quran, hadith, and sunna (Lecture 29: Muhammad and Islam)
What are the Five Pillars of Islam?;Profession of faith, fasting, prayer, almsgiving, and pilgrimage to Mecca (Lecture 29: Muhammad and Islam)
Who became caliph after Muhammad's death?;Abu Bakr (Lecture 29: Muhammad and Islam)
What were the reasons for the military success of Muslim armies?;Wars in Constantinople and Persia, religious divisions, prohibition of raiding among Muslims, and the concept of jihad (Lecture 29: Muhammad and Islam)
Who were the Umayyads?;A new family of caliphs who settled in Damascus (Lecture 29: Muhammad and Islam)
When did the Abbasids come to power?;In 750 (Lecture 29: Muhammad and Islam)
Where was the capital moved to under the Abbasids?;Baghdad (Lecture 29: Muhammad and Islam)
When did the Abbasids rule until?;1258 (Lecture 29: Muhammad and Islam)
What were some achievements during the Abbasid period?;Brilliant cultural achievements and scholars tackling the Greek corpus of learning (Lecture 29: Muhammad and Islam)
What is the old Greek city of Byzantium called today?;Constantinople (Lecture 30: The Birth of Byzantium)
What did the eastern Roman Empire evolve into?;Byzantium (Lecture 30: The Birth of Byzantium)
What were the rulers of the eastern empire generally more skilled and competent at?;Ruling (Lecture 30: The Birth of Byzantium)
What were some characteristics of the east in comparison to the west?;More prosperous, urbanized, and intellectually cultivated (Lecture 30: The Birth of Byzantium)
What caused deep religious divisions in the empire?;Large monophysite communities (Lecture 30: The Birth of Byzantium)
What was the purpose of Justinian's wars against the Vandals, Ostrogoths, and Visigoths?;To recover Rome's lost western provinces (Lecture 30: The Birth of Byzantium)
What was the name of the comprehensive reform of the imperial administration and finances?;Massive reform (Lecture 30: The Birth of Byzantium)
What was the major analysis, organization, and updating of Roman law called?;Corpus Iuris Civilis (Lecture 30: The Birth of Byzantium)
What was the purpose of the Ecumenical Council of 553?;To deal with monophysitism (Lecture 30: The Birth of Byzantium)
Who were the chief architects of Hagia Sophia?;Isidore of Miletus and Anthemius of Tralles (Lecture 30: The Birth of Byzantium)
What did the military policies of the Roman state in the Age of Heraclius show?;That the eastern frontier and the northern frontier were critical (Lecture 30: The Birth of Byzantium)
What did Heraclius lay the beginnings of?; (Lecture 30: The Birth of Byzantium)
What was the period of transformation for the Germanic West?;500 to 750. (Lecture 31: Barbarian Kingdoms in the West)
Which Germanic kingdom was defeated by Justinian in 532-534?;The Vandals. (Lecture 31: Barbarian Kingdoms in the West)
Which Germanic kingdom fell to Muslim invaders from North Africa in 711-716?;The Visigoths. (Lecture 31: Barbarian Kingdoms in the West)
Which Germanic kingdom defeated the Lombards in 755, 756, and 773-774?;The Franks. (Lecture 31: Barbarian Kingdoms in the West)
Who were the Anglo-Saxons?;Many peoples who entered Britain circa 450-600. (Lecture 31: Barbarian Kingdoms in the West)
What were the most effective kingdoms of the Anglo-Saxons?;Kent, Northumbria, Wessex, and Mercia. (Lecture 31: Barbarian Kingdoms in the West)
What was Offa of Mercia the first to call himself?;King of the English. (Lecture 31: Barbarian Kingdoms in the West)
Who were the Franks?;A confederation of peoples who expanded into modern France. (Lecture 31: Barbarian Kingdoms in the West)
What religion did the Franks convert to?;Catholicism. (Lecture 31: Barbarian Kingdoms in the West)
Who divided his kingdom among his sons, leading to frequent strife among the Merovingians?;Clovis. (Lecture 31: Barbarian Kingdoms in the West)
What was the second great development of the years from about 500 to about 750?;The development of the Catholic Church. (Lecture 31: Barbarian Kingdoms in the West)
Where were the greatest centers of education during this time?;In the north of England. (Lecture 31: Barbarian Kingdoms in the West)
Who was the Anglo-S (Lecture 31: Barbarian Kingdoms in the West)
Who was the greatest member of the Carolingian family?;Charlemagne (Lecture 32: The World of Charlemagne)
Where did the Carolingian family arise?;Austrasia (Lecture 32: The World of Charlemagne)
What office did the Carolingians long control?;Mayor of the Palace (Lecture 32: The World of Charlemagne)
Who did Charles Martel defeat in a military campaign?;A Muslim army (Lecture 32: The World of Charlemagne)
Who did Pippin III write to ask for papal approval?;Pope Zachary (Lecture 32: The World of Charlemagne)
What marked a turning point in European history?;The reign of Charlemagne (Lecture 32: The World of Charlemagne)
How many military campaigns did Charlemagne wage?;53 (Lecture 32: The World of Charlemagne)
What were the envoys sent out by Charlemagne called?;Missi dominici (Lecture 32: The World of Charlemagne)
What was a hallmark of Carolingian history?;An alliance with the papacy (Lecture 32: The World of Charlemagne)
What led to the creation of a "New Israel" in Francia?;The imperial coronation of Charlemagne (Lecture 32: The World of Charlemagne)
What event caused the breakup of the Carolingian Empire?;The Treaty of Verdun (Lecture 32: The World of Charlemagne)
What attacks contributed to the dissolution of the Carolingian Empire?;Viking, Muslim, and Magyar attacks (Lecture 32: The World of Charlemagne)
What term did Jean-Jacques Ampère use to describe the Carolingian period?;La renaissance carolingienne. (Lecture 33: The Carolingian Renaissance)
What were the three inspirations for Carolingian activity?;The Bible, the Christian Roman Empire, and the fathers of the church. (Lecture 33: The Carolingian Renaissance)
What were the seven liberal arts?;Grammar, logic, rhetoric, arithmetic, astronomy, geometry, and music. (Lecture 33: The Carolingian Renaissance)
Who was the greatest contemporary product of the Northumbrian tradition?;Alcuin. (Lecture 33: The Carolingian Renaissance)
What were the two divisions of the liberal arts curriculum?;The trivium and the quadrivium. (Lecture 33: The Carolingian Renaissance)
Who urged Charlemagne to insist on education for all?;Alcuin. (Lecture 33: The Carolingian Renaissance)
Where did the Carolingians attract scholars from?;Italy and the Spanish borderlands. (Lecture 33: The Carolingian Renaissance)
What were the conscious goals of the Carolingian movement?;Enhancing the intellectual quality of clergy and preaching secular sanctity to the laity. (Lecture 33: The Carolingian Renaissance)
What happened to the Latin language during the Carolingian period?;It became a dead language. (Lecture 33: The Carolingian Renaissance)
Who was an accomplished architect and wrote a biography of Charlemagne?;Einhard. (Lecture 33: The Carolingian Renaissance)
What types of books were produced during the Carolingian period?;Homely books with no images and books with painted images. (Lecture 33: The Carolingian Renaissance)
Who was the only significant Carolingian writer who (Lecture 33: The Carolingian Renaissance)
What was the period of sustained growth in world history from 900 to 1300 called?;The Expansion of Europe (Lecture 34: The Expansion of Europe)
What is the first fundamental fact of this period?;Long-term rise in population (Lecture 34: The Expansion of Europe)
What are some qualitative evidence of the long-term rise in population?;Larger families, people living longer, no plague or famine, warmer, drier climate, new land under cultivation, and better diet (Lecture 34: The Expansion of Europe)
What technological innovation contributed to the expansion of cereal production?;Greater use of horses as draft animals (Lecture 34: The Expansion of Europe)
What was the new heavy, wheeled plow with an iron share called?;The Carolingian-era innovation (Lecture 34: The Expansion of Europe)
What engineering gains were demanded by the widespread use of water mills?;Gearing (Lecture 34: The Expansion of Europe)
What system spread to much of Europe and made land more efficiently used?;The three-field system (Lecture 34: The Expansion of Europe)
What facilitated trade during this period?;Improved roads and transport vehicles (Lecture 34: The Expansion of Europe)
What commercial networks emerged during this period?;North and Baltic Seas, Danube Basin, Rhone-Saone route, Italian cities and eastern Mediterranean, Persian Gulf and Indian Ocean via caravan routes (Lecture 34: The Expansion of Europe)
What did early medieval towns need?;Peace, security, order, supplies of food, and raw materials (Lecture 34: The Expansion of Europe)
Who said that a kingdom needed men who fought, men who prayed, and men who worked?;King Alfred the Great of England. (Lecture 35: The Chivalrous Society)
What were the three classes mentioned by the French bishops?;Oratores (prayers), Bellatores (fighters), and Laboratores (workers). (Lecture 35: The Chivalrous Society)
What did King Alfred mean by "those who fight"?;The nobility. (Lecture 35: The Chivalrous Society)
What code of conduct was associated with the nobility?;Chivalry. (Lecture 35: The Chivalrous Society)
What were the three levels of nobles?;The truly great, families of local power and influence, and ordinary knights. (Lecture 35: The Chivalrous Society)
What did the word "chivalry" mean?;Conduct becoming men who ride horses. (Lecture 35: The Chivalrous Society)
Who were "those who pray" in medieval society?;The clergy of the medieval church. (Lecture 35: The Chivalrous Society)
What were the two prominent mendicant orders?;The orders of St. Francis and St. Dominic. (Lecture 35: The Chivalrous Society)
Who were "those who work" in the tripartite scheme?;Peasants or farmers. (Lecture 35: The Chivalrous Society)
What were manors in medieval society?;Bipartite estates that benefited both the aristocratic holder and the people who lived and worked there. (Lecture 35: The Chivalrous Society)
What were some of the changes that occurred in medieval Europe due to growing prosperity?;Commuted personal services, more serfs becoming free, (Lecture 35: The Chivalrous Society)
What was the first critical theme explored in the lecture? (Lecture 36: Medieval Political Traditions, I);The development of territorial integrity of the state. (Lecture 36: Medieval Political Traditions, I)
What was the second theme explored in the lecture? (Lecture 36: Medieval Political Traditions, I);The elaboration of effective central institutions of government. (Lecture 36: Medieval Political Traditions, I)
What was the third theme explored in the lecture? (Lecture 36: Medieval Political Traditions, I);The expansion of government activity. (Lecture 36: Medieval Political Traditions, I)
What was the fourth theme explored in the lecture? (Lecture 36: Medieval Political Traditions, I);Changes in the governing classes. (Lecture 36: Medieval Political Traditions, I)
Who was the English king who rallied against the Vikings?;Alfred the Great. (Lecture 36: Medieval Political Traditions, I)
Who conquered England in 1014?;Swein Forkbeard. (Lecture 36: Medieval Political Traditions, I)
Who succeeded Swein Forkbeard as the ruler of England?;Cnut. (Lecture 36: Medieval Political Traditions, I)
Who was the English king defeated by Duke William at Hastings in 1066?;Harold Wessex. (Lecture 36: Medieval Political Traditions, I)
What event is known as the "Norman conquest"?;The conquest of England by Duke William. (Lecture 36: Medieval Political Traditions, I)
Who forced King John to sign the Magna Carta in 1215?;The English barons. (Lecture 36: Medieval Political Traditions, I)
What was the purpose of the Magna Carta?;To ensure that the king was not above the law and to demand an end to feudal abuses. (Lecture 36: Medieval Political Traditions, I)
What were the two great political and institutional questions in 13th-century England?;How to make political decisions without violence, and who gets to participate in decision making. (Lecture 36: Medieval Political Traditions, I)
What is the main theme of this lecture? (Lecture 37: Medieval Political Traditions, II);Avoiding the assumption of centralization as the normal pattern in medieval Europe. (Lecture 37: Medieval Political Traditions, II)
What are taifas?;Small, autonomous regions in Islamic Spain. (Lecture 37: Medieval Political Traditions, II)
Who led the Reconquista in Spain?;Castile. (Lecture 37: Medieval Political Traditions, II)
What are the three main zones of Italy?;The south, the center, and the north. (Lecture 37: Medieval Political Traditions, II)
What were communes in Italy?;Sworn associations of prominent townsmen. (Lecture 37: Medieval Political Traditions, II)
Who built the strongest state in 10th century Germany?;The Saxons/Ottonians. (Lecture 37: Medieval Political Traditions, II)
What was the investiture controversy?;The struggle for lay control of church affairs between German kings/emperors and the papacy. (Lecture 37: Medieval Political Traditions, II)
What was the Fourth Lateran Council?;A church-wide parliament in 1215. (Lecture 37: Medieval Political Traditions, II)
What were some disciplinary mechanisms used by the papacy?;Excommunication, interdict, and inquisition. (Lecture 37: Medieval Political Traditions, II)
What is the main lesson of high medieval political development?;The immense creativity and variety of political possibilities. (Lecture 37: Medieval Political Traditions, II)
What is scholasticism?;The dominant Latin intellectual culture of high medieval Europe. (Lecture 38: Scholastic Culture)
What were the common forms of Latin writing during the medieval period?;Letters, bureaucratic and governmental correspondence, mystical treatises, satire, and poetry. (Lecture 38: Scholastic Culture)
What was the impact of logic on intellectual life during the medieval period?;Logic was elevated to paramount status among the disciplines, and logical reasoning came to be seen as equal or even superior to authorities when settling a controverted issue. (Lecture 38: Scholastic Culture)
What is a studium generale?;A place where all studies could be pursued, which eventually developed into the medieval university. (Lecture 38: Scholastic Culture)
Who was Thomas Aquinas?;A proliﬁc writer and philosopher who made signiﬁcant contributions to the philosophical and theological questions of his time, particularly in relation to the problem of the relationship between faith and reason. (Lecture 38: Scholastic Culture)
What was the medieval motto "Clericus, id est, litteratus" referring to?;A member of the clergy, that is, a literate person. (Lecture 39: Vernacular Culture)
What does the term "vernacular" mean in the context of the Middle Ages?;Non-Latin languages, popular as opposed to elite, and lay as opposed to ecclesiastical or secular. (Lecture 39: Vernacular Culture)
Why did some people begin to use the vernacular instead of Latin?;Latin was preserved by the government and the church, while the vernacular languages were spoken by the majority of people. (Lecture 39: Vernacular Culture)
Where did the oldest bodies of vernacular writings emerge?;The British Isles, the German-speaking lands, Slavic realms, and Scandinavia. (Lecture 39: Vernacular Culture)
What is the oldest single work of vernacular literature?;The anonymous Song of Roland. (Lecture 39: Vernacular Culture)
Who was the greatest vernacular writer of the Middle Ages?;Dante Alighieri. (Lecture 39: Vernacular Culture)
What is the structure of Dante's Commedia?;It is arranged into 140 cantos, with a terza rima rhyme scheme (ababcbcdc). (Lecture 39: Vernacular Culture)
What were the two lay movements in high medieval Europe?;Religious reform movements and the Crusades. (Lecture 39: Vernacular Culture)
What was the novelty in the heretical and crusading movements?;The mobilization of vast numbers of lay (Lecture 39: Vernacular Culture)
What were some of the social insurrections that occurred during the period from 1300 to 1500?;In England, France, and Florence. (Lecture 40: The Crisis of Renaissance Europe)
What was the Hundred Years War?;A war between France and England that lasted from 1340 to 1453. (Lecture 40: The Crisis of Renaissance Europe)
What were the consequences of the Hundred Years War for France and England?;For France, it heightened national consciousness and professionalized the military. For England, it enhanced the role of Parliament and created factional divides in the aristocracy. (Lecture 40: The Crisis of Renaissance Europe)
What important event happened in Iberia in 1492?;The last Muslim stronghold in Granada fell to the Reconquista, and Ferdinand and Isabella issued a decree requiring Jews to convert or depart. (Lecture 40: The Crisis of Renaissance Europe)
What were the major developments in Italy during this period?;The rise of Milan, Florence, and Venice as competing powers, and the papacy's control of the center being compromised by the papal absence in Avignon. (Lecture 40: The Crisis of Renaissance Europe)
What were some major developments along Europe's eastern frontier during this period?;Lithuania and Poland coalesced into a powerful kingdom, Russia began to unite a large area of lands centered on the Grand Duchy of Moscow, and the Ottoman Turks captured Constantinople. (Lecture 40: The Crisis of Renaissance Europe)
What was the Great Schism?;A period from 1378 to 1417 when two, and sometimes three, men claimed to be the legitimate pope. (Lecture 40: The Crisis of Renaissance Europe)
What is the "Renaissance problem"?;The idea that the Renaissance was not a simple awakening after a period of darkness and despair. (Lecture 41: The Renaissance Problem)
Who first used the word "rinascità"?;Giorgio Vasari. (Lecture 41: The Renaissance Problem)
What term is associated with love and concern for human beings?;Humanism. (Lecture 41: The Renaissance Problem)
Why did the Renaissance begin in Italy?;Italy had greater wealth, higher literacy, and felt a stronger connection to the Roman heritage. (Lecture 41: The Renaissance Problem)
How did the Renaissance spread?;Through travel, printing, and the reception of Renaissance culture in other cities. (Lecture 41: The Renaissance Problem)
What period is characterized by individual geniuses but little movement?;Before 1370. (Lecture 41: The Renaissance Problem)
What period saw the reception of the Renaissance in Rome, Milan, and Venice?;Starting in the 1450s. (Lecture 41: The Renaissance Problem)
What are some suggested readings on the Renaissance?;Castiglione's "The Courtier," Cellini's "Autobiography," Hale's "The Civilization of Europe in the Renaissance," Hartt's "History of Italian Renaissance Art," King's "Women of the Renaissance," Machiavelli's "The Prince," and Panofsky's "Renaissance and Renascences in Western Art." (Lecture 41: The Renaissance Problem)
Did Renaissance figures define themselves against the preceding period?;Yes. (Lecture 41: The Renaissance Problem)
Who wrote the Decameron?;Giovanni Boccaccio (Lecture 42: Renaissance Portraits)
Where did Petrarch grow up?;In the south of France (Lecture 42: Renaissance Portraits)
Who was considered the giant of the early Renaissance?;Petrarch (Lecture 42: Renaissance Portraits)
Who stressed Latin and Greek as the keys to education?;Guarino of Verona (Lecture 42: Renaissance Portraits)
Who became head of state at 21 and promoted civic humanism?;Lorenzo de’ Medici (Lecture 42: Renaissance Portraits)
Who painted the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel?;Michelangelo (Lecture 42: Renaissance Portraits)
What was the psychological parallel between the north and south during the Renaissance?;Man was a flawed creature but perfectible by effort. (Lecture 43: The Northern Renaissance)
What are the two fundamental reasons for exploring the "northern" Renaissance?;To see what happened to the Renaissance movement when it crossed the Alps and as the intellectual background to the religious reformations of the 16th century. (Lecture 43: The Northern Renaissance)
What was different about lay culture in the north compared to the south during the Renaissance?;It was less urban, literate, and affluent. (Lecture 43: The Northern Renaissance)
What were the sources of the "new learning" in the north of Europe?;The Bible and the church fathers. (Lecture 43: The Northern Renaissance)
Who was the most important of the French Christian humanists during the northern Renaissance?;Jacques Lefèvre d’Étaples. (Lecture 43: The Northern Renaissance)
Who founded St. Paul's school in London?;John Colet. (Lecture 43: The Northern Renaissance)
Who wrote the famous work "Utopia"?;Thomas More. (Lecture 43: The Northern Renaissance)
Who was known as the "Prince of Humanists"?;Desiderius Erasmus. (Lecture 43: The Northern Renaissance)
Who was Martin Luther?;A magisterial reformer born in 1483. (Lecture 44: The Protestant Reformation—Martin Luther)
What significant event did Luther do in October 1517?;He posted Ninety-five Theses against indulgences on the door of the castle church in Wittenberg. (Lecture 44: The Protestant Reformation—Martin Luther)
What did the Ninety-five Theses primarily challenge?;Indulgences. (Lecture 44: The Protestant Reformation—Martin Luther)
What happened to Luther in January of 1521?;Pope Leo X excommunicated him. (Lecture 44: The Protestant Reformation—Martin Luther)
What was Luther's stance at the imperial Diet of Worms in 1521?;He refused to recant. (Lecture 44: The Protestant Reformation—Martin Luther)
How many valid sacraments did Luther recognize?;Two, baptism and the Eucharist. (Lecture 44: The Protestant Reformation—Martin Luther)
What is the core of Luther's teaching based on?;The three "alones" or "onlys." (Lecture 44: The Protestant Reformation—Martin Luther)
What does "sola fide" mean?;By faith alone. (Lecture 44: The Protestant Reformation—Martin Luther)
What does "sola gratia" mean?;Grace alone. (Lecture 44: The Protestant Reformation—Martin Luther)
What does "sola scriptura" mean?;Bible alone as the single source of authority in religious matters. (Lecture 44: The Protestant Reformation—Martin Luther)
What is the birthplace of John Calvin?;Noyon in northern France (Lecture 45: The Protestant Reformation—John Calvin)
Who provided for Calvin's education?;The parish priest (Lecture 45: The Protestant Reformation—John Calvin)
What is the form of Protestantism that derives from John Calvin called?;The Reformed tradition (Lecture 45: The Protestant Reformation—John Calvin)
Who was the precursor to John Calvin in the Swiss reformation?;Huldreich Zwingli (Lecture 45: The Protestant Reformation—John Calvin)
Where did John Calvin publish the first edition of his "Institutes of the Christian Religion"?;Basle (Lecture 45: The Protestant Reformation—John Calvin)
Who invited John Calvin to join him in reforming Geneva?;Guillaume Farel (Lecture 45: The Protestant Reformation—John Calvin)
What were the four groups with power in Geneva's "Holy Commonwealth"?;Pastors, doctors, elders, and deacons (Lecture 45: The Protestant Reformation—John Calvin)
What mnemonic device is used to present Calvin's teaching?;TULIP (Lecture 45: The Protestant Reformation—John Calvin)
What does the "T" in TULIP stand for in Calvinism?;Total depravity (Lecture 45: The Protestant Reformation—John Calvin)
What does the "U" in TULIP stand for in Calvinism?;Unconditional election (Lecture 45: The Protestant Reformation—John Calvin)
What does the "L" in TULIP stand for in Calvinism?;Limited atonement (Lecture 45: The Protestant Reformation—John Calvin)
What does the "I" in TULIP stand for in Calvinism?;Irresistible grace (Lecture 45: The Protestant Reformation—John Calvin)
What does the "P" in TULIP stand for in Calvinism?;Persistence in grace  (Lecture 45: The Protestant Reformation—John Calvin)
What common threads do you see in the work of the Catholic reformers?;They drew on humanist scholarship and expressed critiques of the late medieval church. (Lecture 46: Catholic Reforms and “Confessionalization”)
Why do you suppose that, in the age of "confessionalization," there did not emerge a single coherent alternative to Roman Catholicism?;The religious landscape was diverse, with Lutheranism, Calvinism, Anglicanism, and Anabaptism all emerging as distinct Protestant movements. (Lecture 46: Catholic Reforms and “Confessionalization”)
What term was commonly used to describe religious history of the 16th century?;Reformation and the Counter-Reformation. (Lecture 46: Catholic Reforms and “Confessionalization”)
When did the Counter-Reformation have its heyday?;From 1550 to 1650. (Lecture 46: Catholic Reforms and “Confessionalization”)
Who was Spain’s Francisco Cardinal Ximénes de Cisneros?;A reformer who founded the University of Alcalá and worked on the Complutensian Polyglot Bible. (Lecture 46: Catholic Reforms and “Confessionalization”)
What did the Congregation of the Oratory, or "Oratorians", focus on?;Good preaching, inspiring worship, and service to ordinary laypeople. (Lecture 46: Catholic Reforms and “Confessionalization”)
Who founded the Society of Jesus (the Jesuits)?;St. Ignatius Loyola. (Lecture 46: Catholic Reforms and “Confessionalization”)
What did the Council of Trent mainly affirm?;Customary positions like the Nicene Creed, equality of Scripture and tradition, church’s authority to interpret the Bible, and traditional Catholic practices. (Lecture 46: Catholic Reforms and “Confessionalization”)
What does "cuius regio, eius religio" mean?;Whose rule, his religion. (Lecture 46: Catholic Reforms and “Confessionalization”)
What was the Reformed tradition based around?;Calvin’s Institutes. (Lecture 46: Catholic Reforms and “Confessionalization”)
Why did the Reformation start in England?;Henry VIII's need for a divorce. (Lecture 46: Catholic Reforms and “Confessionalization”)
What was a primary belief of the Anabaptists?;Rejection of infant baptism. (Lecture 46: Catholic Reforms and “Confessionalization”)
When did Western civilization and world history merge significantly?;With the age of exploration and discovery. (Lecture 47: Exploration and Empire)
Who initially globalized Western civilization with voyages of exploration, commerce, and conquest?;The Portuguese and Spanish. (Lecture 47: Exploration and Empire)
What were some of the new factors that emerged in the late medieval and Renaissance period?;Recovery of ancient geographical writings, accounts of travels by Marco Polo and John Mandeville, and better maps and technological innovations. (Lecture 47: Exploration and Empire)
Why did Europeans seek new routes to the Orient?;The Ottoman Turks shut off the trade routes, and Italians had a near-monopoly on Mediterranean trade. (Lecture 47: Exploration and Empire)
Who first reached Asia by going east from Europe in the late 15th century?;Vasco da Gama. (Lecture 47: Exploration and Empire) 
Who believed he had discovered islands off the coast of Japan, but in reality had discovered a "New World"?;Cristoforo Colombo (Christopher Columbus). (Lecture 47: Exploration and Empire)
Who first realized that Columbus had discovered a new continent?;Amerigo Vespucci. (Lecture 47: Exploration and Empire)
What is the "Columbian exchange"?;The movement of diseases, animals, and plants in both directions across the Atlantic after Columbus's voyages. (Lecture 47: Exploration and Empire)
What percentage of the native population of the Indies likely died as a result of diseases brought by Europeans?;Perhaps 90 percent. (Lecture 47: Exploration and Empire)
Which major Old World plants were introduced to the New World?;Oats, barley, and wheat. (Lecture 47: Exploration and Empire)
What is the main characteristic of the "system" of alliances in Western civilization during the 16th century?;Shifting patterns of alliances among the greatest European powers. (Lecture 48: What Challenges Remain?)
Who were the two main opposing dynasties in the Hapsburg-Valois rivalry?;Valois rulers of France and Hapsburg rulers of the Spanish Empire and the Holy Roman Empire. (Lecture 48: What Challenges Remain?)
Which two dynastic marriages created a Hapsburg sphere of influence in Europe and the Americas?;Maximilian of Austria and Mary of Burgundy, Ferdinand of Aragon and Isabella of Castile. (Lecture 48: What Challenges Remain?)
What did France do to elude domination by the Hapsburg lands?;Supported Protestant Sweden and north German states against the Austrian Hapsburgs. (Lecture 48: What Challenges Remain?)
Which naval forces fought and defeated the Turks at Lepanto in 1571?;The Spanish. (Lecture 48: What Challenges Remain?)
Which countries began to build overseas empires in North America in the 17th century?;France and England. (Lecture 48: What Challenges Remain?)
Who built trading stations in the Indian Ocean basin and the South China Sea?;The Dutch. (Lecture 48: What Challenges Remain?)
Who were the key players dominating the European scene by the year 1700?;England, Holland, France, Spain, German states, Austria, Russia, and Turkey. (Lecture 48: What Challenges Remain?)
Who published "On the Revolutions of Heavenly Bodies"?;Nicholas Copernicus (1473–1543)  (Lecture 48: What Challenges Remain?)